---
title: Presuppositionless Thinking
description: Learn about presuppositionless thinking in Hegel's Science of Logic
isArticle: true
authors: Ahilleas Rokni (2024)
editors:
contributors: Michael Yudanin (2025)
---

# Presuppositionless Thinking

## Why be presuppositionless?

Presuppositionless thinking is a form of thinking that thinks without relying on any prior assumptions or beliefs and without even 
presupposing a particular method of inquiry. Simply put, it is a commitment to a philosophical
inquiry that does not proceed according to preconceived notions of how things
are or should be but is instead open to the possibility that things may be otherwise. At its
most honest, the tenet of presuppositionlessness is the acceptance that our
knowledge of things may be flawed or incomplete because the approach that
philosophy has taken to comprehend a concepts may have itself been flawed. Thus,
it is a voyage of exploration into the regions of reason that may or may not
disclose something new. It is entirely possible that a presuppositionless
approach may yield nothing at all, or nothing at all new. It is equally
possible, however, that presuppositionlessness may show us something new about
thought. We simply cannot presuppose anythign prior to the ordeal.

One may baulk at the idea that our knowledge of things may be flawed. What
exactly is it that we're claiming to be flawed? Doesn't there need to be an
argument for why we should take our knowledge to be flawed? Absolutely. One
argument is this. Hegel takes seriously Kant's discoveries in the transcendental
dialectic - the self-movement of Reason is not merely an illusion but is in fact
something fundamental about what it is to be rational. Yet, if we reflect on our
typical understanding of concepts we will immediately notice that they bear no
resemblance whatsoever to how reason appears to be. In this regard reason is
dialectical, namely, it transforms into its opposite, and this movement of
concepts appears to be essential to what reason is. For Kant, this is just an
illusion precisely because this is not how the world appears to be. For Hegel,
on the other hand, this should prompt us to wonder whether we have properly
understood the nature of Reason and, thereby, the nature of thought itself.

Presuppositionless thinking has a long lineage in the history of philosophy and
is not Hegel's invention. And while Kant may not be the most obvious source of
inspiration, we find that Descartes, too, was struck by the notion that our
received notions might be flawed and that we should try to inquire into the
nature of things by setting aside all received assumptions. Descartes' argument
is that we have experience of our senses failing us. We have experience of
seeing an object as being so-and-so only to discover that it is, in fact,
otherwise. So if our senses fail us occasionally, why not also our concepts
about the world? And so the sceptical scenario is set. Thus, Descartes sets
aside all of his assumptions about the world and reaches the most certain, if
not simplest, point that he can conceive, from which the rest of his philosophy
grows.

Descartes' method is called *systemic doubt*, as it subjects to critical scrutiny any belief, idea, or piece of knowledge. It is also called *Cartesian doubt* to honor its alleged inventor. However, the method of doubting whatever you and your interlocutors see as true and correct it not new. Most famously, Socrates practiced it in his dialogues, greatly irritating many citizens of Athens. It is also widely used in the Indian philosophical tradition, specifically in the Upanishads. Perhaps, it is impossible to engage in genuine philosophical inquiry without questioning not only the conclusions and the soundness of reasoning but also the assumptions and, ultimately, the very method of relying on presuppositions.

A further, and perhaps no less important, reason for presuppositionless thinking
is the demand for freedom. This is something that is greatly emphasised by
Houlgate (2022). If we want to be genuinely free we cannot be content to simply
accept the received notions of the world or ideas, by others or ourselves, but,
rather, open ourselves to investigating whether they are true (or false) as the
present themselves. The demand for freedom, when taken absolutely seriously,
means that we must be open to inquire into not only the basis for this or that
apparent truth (as perceived, experienced, thought or otherwise) but also
inquire into the very nature of thought itself. This opening is the basis of
presuppositionlessness. We must be open, if we want to be free, to both prove or
disprove ourselves since, if the former, we have greater reason to be confident
in our thoughts and, if the latter, we have corrected ourselves and are now in a
better position than where we started out from. A win-win situation if there
ever was one. This is the simplest position that one can take and a fair
starting point for taking on the methodological tenet of presuppositionless
thinking. There is no argument about the nature of reason or the reliability of
senses. There is only an assertion that to be free is to have a true
understanding of the world and that, if we are committed to freedom, we should
be open to inquiring into what we know and how we know, and proving whether it is true or false, correct or incorrect.

Presuppositionless thinking, then, is underpinned by a philosophical stance that
leaves open the possibility that we may be misled about some aspects of reality
and that we should inquire into the nature of things as well as into the nature
of thought that inquires.

## What is it to be presuppositionless?

We have looked at the reasons for why one might take presuppositionless thinking
as a methodological tenet. We will now look at what it means to be
presuppositionless. Simply put, to be presuppositionless is to not be guided by
preconceived notions. But how is this actually possible? If I am absolutely
presuppositionless, then, taken to its logical extreme (or absurdity) I cannot
refer to language, experience, or history for my philosophy. These are all
established ideas and how can one utter even a word without presupposing its
meaning! But this is manifestly not Hegel's approach. Not only is _The Science
of Logic_ (_SL_) written in German, but it makes use of the widest possible
range of concepts from science and the history of philosophy - from the concept
of the infinite to the dual concepts of action and reaction. Presuppositionless
thinking, then, cannot mean an abstraction from reality. So what exactly are we
being presuppositionless about? Notably, Richard Dien Winfield, in his book
Reason and Justice (1988), wrote that there are some presuppositions that are
necessary for the simple doing of philosophy and that we should think of them as
“enabling conditions”. There are some things, like language and experience,
without which it would be impossible to even conceive of a presuppositionless
project, let alone carry one out. Such things as language and experience, then,
are so fundamental that one could not reasonably be sceptical about them since
the very thought of scepticism about them is itself founded on the very things
about which you are expressing scepticism.

Hegel shows his gratitude to exactly these presuppositions in the preface to
second edition of the _SL_. He writes: “but this traditional material, the
familiar forms of thought, must be regarded as an extremely important source,
indeed as a necessary condition and as a presupposition to be gratefully
acknowledged even though what it offers is only here and there a meagre shred or
a disordered heap of dead bones” (31). It is clear that Hegel accepts language,
experience, and history as necessary presuppositions for doing philosophy. But
if Hegel is not sceptical about the very medium through which we grasp and
develop our understanding of the world, then about what is he sceptical? The
answer is given in a passage a few pages down in the preface to the second
edition of the _SL_:

> “Such presuppositions as that infinity is different from finitude, that
> content is other than form, that the inner is other than the outer, also that
> mediation is not immediacy (as if anyone did not know such things), are
> brought forward by way of information and narrated and asserted rather than
> proved. But there is something stupid - I can find no other word for it -
> about this didactic behaviour; technically it is unjustifiable simply to
> presuppose and straightway assume such propositions” (41).

Hegel's concern has to do with whether our specifically _philosophical_
assumptions are justified or not. Hegel is not out to question whether language
is the best medium for us to do philosophy; or to investigate what happens if we
abstract from experience. He takes these things as necessary conditions for
philosophical activity. Instead, Hegel is interested in whether we have actually
comprehended the concept of infinity or the concept of mechanism. Obviously we
already have these concepts. We already have the concept of infinity and the
concept of mechanism - Hegel does not doubt that. But have we properly
understood them? What is the infinite? Is it the unbounded? Is it absolutely
opposed to the finite? Is it made up of infinite finites? Again, Hegel does not
doubt that there is a concept of the infinite. Hegel doubts, rather, that we
have an adequate comprehension of the infinite. If we continue our critical journey, from here we might even proceed to another possible question: are we justified in using this concept, in a certain way or at all?

This, again, raises interesting questions about the justification for Hegel's
scepticism. Why does Hegel just doubt our philosophical assumptions? Why stop
there? Why not doubt everything? Because, and unlike Descartes, Hegel is deeply
sensitive to the essentiality of some presuppositions. Hegel has often been
credited as being a philosopher who is sensitive to history, and nowhere is this
more significant than at the beginning of his philosophical project. Hegel has
no time for philosophical projects that are complete abstractions because they
are merely pretensions to abstract thinking, because such abstraction fails to
justify itself and thus actually ends up being incoherent. There is a bedrock of
assumptions, without which we cannot do any kind of philosophy. And yet, these
assumptions do not impede our inquiry into the nature of things and thought. Put
more technically, the "enabling conditions" precisely enable us to engage in
philosophical inquiry, but do not determine the outcome of that inquiry. Said
differently again, having legs enable walking around, but that doesn't mean the
destination is hereby decided.

## How does presuppositionlessness work?

Let us briefly outline how exactly presuppositionlessness works in practice. We
have already stated that presuppositionlessness does not require us to do away
with language or our reservoir of concepts. We are not trying to reinvent the
wheel. Rather, we are _not_ taking for granted that our concepts are true. What
we are inquire into is whether we have understood the nature of our concepts
correctly or not. In this sense, then, we are not calling into question the
conditions that enable us to do philosophy in the first place. Our
presuppositionlessness is, instead, a methodological presuppositionlessness.

The first tenet of methodological presuppositionlessness is “do not take
anything for granted”. As such, whilst doing philosophy we will never be driven
by what philosophers have normally taken 'x' to be, or by what we think 'y' is
based on experience. We will set aside our assumptions about how philosophical
concepts ought to be. In the absence of any assumptions about how philosophical
assumptions ought to be, how is our philosophical inquiry to proceed? This
brings us to the matter of the beginning of philosophy, which is a whole topic
unto itself; for now, we will assume that there is nothing problematic about the
beginning. Hegel's strategy for beginning his philosophical inquiry, despite
setting aside all assumptions, is to abstract all content from thought and to
see where thought takes us. This is the second methodological tenet: “attend to
the immanent determination of thought and do not import anything external into
it”. Once we have set aside all of our assumptions and abstracted all content
from thought, our philosophical inquiry will proceed by attending to the
immanent character of our thought. Whatever that may be. As it turns out, when
we abstract all content from thought what we are left with is the simple is-ness
of thought or “pure being”. If we think about “pure being” and consider its
characteristics we will discover that it is, in fact, “pure nothing”. Yet then we discover that one *vanishes into* anotehr, that being turns into nothing and nothing into being immediately upon consideration. And so on
and so forth, the dialectic of thought proceeds propelling itself.
