---
title: Sublation
seoTitle: Sublation in Hegel's Logic
description: Learn about sublation from Hegel's philosophy.
isArticle: true
authors: Filip Niklas (2024)
editors: Mert Can Yirmibes (2024), Ahilleas Rokni (2024)
contributors:
---

## Sublation

> _To sublate_ and _being sublated_ (the _idealized_) constitute one of the most
> important concepts of philosophy (Hegel 2010, 81/21.94).

The importance of the concept of sublation [_Aufhebung_] in Hegel's philosophy
cannot be understated. It is a notion that is virtually omnipresent in Hegel's
entire systematic oeuvre and plays a chief role in the dialectical determination
of ideas and concepts.

However, despite its pivotal significance, it does not receive direct treatment
in _The Science of Logic_, Hegel's major work on logic and metaphysics, apart
from a remark that follows the
[`development of becoming`](/articles/hegel/reference/becoming/development). The
remark in question, however, is instructive given its context and illustrates
the essential three-pronged structure of sublation.

While sublation enjoys common usage in the German language, there is no direct
equivalent in English. And so sublation has become something of a highly
technical term that is most often used in Hegelian scholarship. This is
unfortunate, since the speculative element in the word itself never natively
manifests to the thinker, and one must continuously bring together disparate
meanings into this rather awkward term.

### Semantics

The German _aufheben_ has a twofold meaning, Hegel writes. On the one hand, it
means to _to keep_ or _to preserve_. On the other hand, it means _to cause to
cease_ or _to put an end to_. In addition to these two, there is a third
meaning, which is to _lift up_.

To preserve something, Hegel notes, has a negative tinge to it because to
preserve something one must undermine its immediacy in order to _retain_ it. One
might say that to keep something may mean to hold on to it or secure it, but
thereby lose its innocence. "That which is sublated is thus something at the
same time preserved, something that has lost its immediacy but has not come to
nothing for that" (Hegel 2010, 82/21.94). It can be seen already how the meaning
of keeping here cannot but entail negation, thus justifying the move from
preservation to ceasing. This slippage from one idea to the other is exactly the
dialectical thread Hegel puts under the magnifying glass.

Hegel praises words in language that have such double-meanings and notes the
Latin _tollere_, which serves as the root for the English "toll" (payment) and
"extol" (praise). In particular, he notes the deficiency with _tollere_ that its
positive determination only goes as far as "lifting up", whereas _aufheben_
enjoys the additional notion of preserving.

However, Hegel does not directly state the _three_ meanings of sublation, even
though they are all implied in the text. This lack of stating it expressly
appears puzzling given that his own usage relies heavily on it.

### Structure

> What is sublated does not thereby turn into nothing. Nothing is the
> _immediate_; something sublated is on the contrary something _mediated_; it is
> something non-existent but as a result that has proceeded from a being; it
> still _has in itself_, therefore, the _determinateness from which it derives_
> (Hegel 2010, 81/21.94).

Sublation in Hegel's philosophy primarily concerns a special state of being. It
is a determinateness that signifies something is no longer immediately what is
was, but is understood as a moment of a context. Despite being something
mediated in this way, it nonetheless contains the "_determinateness from
which it derives_", which can be understood as a genealogy of its dialectical
development. Put differently, in being sublated, the matter in question is no
longer solely grasped in its own terms, but included in the terms of another.

For example, to say that `being` is sublated in `becoming` means that `being` is
no longer understood in its immediacy but as a moment of the context of
`becoming`&mdash;more precisely, as coming-to-be and ceasing-to-be.

But why is something sublated? Because a dialectic movement took place where
something is no longer the something that it had immediately presented itself
as. Put differently, the matter at hand is not what it is. However, dialectical
movement alone is not sufficient to understand something as sublated. `Being`
vanishing into `nothing` does not thereby sublate `being`. To be something
sublated, by contrast, entails a mutated state of the category that contains its
immediate state _as_ negated. Sublated `being` explicitly shows that `being` in
its immediacy is _negated_, but precisely in that negation retains a reference
to the _immediacy_ as it was.

#### Diaception (Niklas)

In sublation, a double view necessarily exists. On the one hand, sublation
expresses that a concept has turned out to be a _moment_ of another. On the
other hand, however, sublation also expresses a trace to a past conception;
putting it terse, a _concept_ has turned out to be a moment of another. One can
understand this difference in terms of scopes: an absolute scope and a relative
scope.

Consider the example of `being`. In its sublation, `pure being` is rendered,
paradoxically, a moment. A moment in the conceptual evolution of `being` whereby
it was initially simple and pure but is now one among many.

In more practical terms, that something is sublated means that it longer retains
the absolute conceptual scope at hand but is relegated to a certain part of it.
However, being in this partial state does not eliminate its initial immediacy
altogether but keeps it precisely as negated. The immediacy _is_ negated, but
the trace back to it is retained.

The former thus holds a relative scope and the latter currently holds the
absolute scope. Despite holding a relative scope, `being` nonetheless contains
the trace to its original immediacy, and so we can say that it "points" back to
its immediacy. And it can only "point" to this immediacy because it is exactly
unavailable to it (were `being` not sublated, it would be immediate and there
would be no mediation where any "pointing" would take place).

To be something sublated, by contrast, entails a binding between its immediate
state and its mediated state, or between its absolute- and relative scope.
Diaception is the grasping of this binding, or holding in view both the absolute
and relative scope of a category.

Diaception does not posit that anything immediate remains in sublation. When
Hegel writes that, "what is sublated does not thereby turn into nothing. Nothing
is the _immediate_; something sublated is on the contrary something _mediated_;"
(Hegel 2010, 81/21.94), diaception does not run counter to this statement
because it concerns the _mediation_ involved. The mediation that has resulted in
sublation, which in turn necessitate duality in the state of a category.

In the context of `existence`, for example, where `being` and `nothing` are
understood to be in a unity, `being` has its immediate state negated&mdash;there
is no `pure being`&mdash;but in being _negated_ it is no less kept. Sublation
entails diaception and thus implies development of a category.

#### Sublation and Truth (Niklas)

The development of a category in sublation is what Hegel refers to when he says
that something has become understood _in its truth_. A category or thought
underwent an internal dialectical transition through which it _turned out to be_
something else&mdash;not something _completely_ different (the `being` of
`existence` still shares something with `pure being`, its ancestor, so to
speak), but also not something _entirely_ identical.

The new sublated state refers back to its absolute being, and refers to it as
negated, whereby it is simultaneously retained. It is this intense binding that
grants something to be seen _in its truth_: a primordial state that was
internally incoherent whose incoherence reforged it to this current state.

In this way, _truth_, in light of Hegel's thinking, is never something purely
immediate but the result of a development. Or, put differently, the truth is
always mediated even if it is immediate &ndash; it has to be a mediated
immediacy. It is a context made up of sublated moments, and whose conception
understands that these moments were at one point totally unbounded, in their
boundlessness utterly failed, and found themselves renewed in this
multi-dimensional sphere as self-bounded moments.

## Further Commentary

### Houlgate

Stephen Houlgate reads sublation as fusing two processes into one. The first
process involves negating something while the second process involves preserving
something. But what is specifically negated is the "simple _immediacy_ &ndash;
or purity &ndash; of something" (Houlgate 2022, 153). For that reason, since
what is sublated is no longer purely and immediately itself, Houlgate writes
that "it must be thought together with its negation" (Houlgate 2022, 153). In
this respect, it matches what Hegel writes: "something is sublated only in so
far as it has entered into unity with its opposite" (Hegel 2010, 82/21.95).

Houlgate points out that while `being` and `nothing` are sublated in `becoming`,
this sublation is strictly incomplete. The sublation here is only partial
because "each vanishes into its _pure other_, and their immediacy, or purity, is
thus not thoroughly negated" (Houlgate 2022, 153). Viewed differently, the
immediacy of each vanishes so completely that there is no remnant which could be
considered a moment. By contrast, in `determinate being` (`existence`) the
immediacy is thoroughly negated and "each is present only as united with its
opposite" (Houlgate 2022, 153).

Houlgate notes further three things about sublation. In the first place,
sublation is not an operation performed by us&mdash;human thinkers in
time&mdash;on concepts or determinations of being. "It occurs", Houlgate states,
"when we render explicit what a category is implicitly, but it is made necessary
by the category itself" (Houlgate 2022, 153). Categories are thus not sublated
_by us_, but as the case of `being` and `nothing` shows:

> They do not sublate themselves reciprocally &ndash; the one sublating the
> other externally &ndash; but each rather sublates itself in itself and is
> within it the opposite of itself (Hegel 2010, 81/21.93).

In the second place, sublation does not presuppose a unity into which categories
are sublated (or sublate themselves), but is, "the process through which such a
unity emerges" (Houlgate 2022, 153). Speculative thought is
[presuppositionless thought](/articles/hegel/guides/presuppositionless-thinking)
and that entails that no determinate conception of being or rules of thought are
presupposed in advance, which includes the very notion that a category will be
sublated (or indeed sublated into a unity). If something emerges, it will be
_unforeseen_ by the process of sublation.

In the third place, sublation entails that categories necessarily change their
logical structure. For example, `being` and `nothing` are initially pure and
immediately themselves, begin to shed that immediacy in `becoming`, and finally
lose their purity in `existence` where each is understood to be in an
inseparable unity with its other. As Houlgate writes, "The process of sublation
is thus one in which categories lose their immediacy, form a unity with their
opposites and thereby transform themselves logically into _new_ categories"
(Houlgate 2022, 154).

With regards to Houlgate's second point, there is a discrepancy with the idea
that sublation does not presuppose a unity when Hegel states that "something is
sublated only in so far as it has entered into unity with its opposite" (Hegel
2010, 82/21.95). Insofar as something is sublated&mdash;or being
sublated&mdash;there must be a unity involved. However, insofar as a category is
thought in its immediacy, there is at that point no indication whether or not a
sublation will take place; or if a dialectical movement does occur, then,
following presuppositionless thinking, one cannot presuppose whether that is
part of a process of sublation (whereby the immediacy is turned into a moment).
Therefore, not presupposing a unity seems to belong to speculative thought
rather than specifically sublation.
